>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY OCTOBER 19...
THE LATEST ON THE EBOLA SCARE.
WE'LL HEAR FROM A REPORTER WHO
RECENTLY RETURNED FROM LIBERIA.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
MILLIONS OF POOR PEOPLE HAVE
BECOME ELIGIBLE FOR HEALTH
INSURANCE UNDER THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT.
BUT SOME MIGHT NOT BE GETTING
THE CARE THEY NEED.
>> BECAUSE IT'S NOT ENOUGH TO
JUST INSURE PEOPLE.
WE ACTUALLY HAVE TO HAVE
SYSTEMS IN PLACE THAT ARE
EFFECTIVE AND ECONOMICAL AND
CREDIBLE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE CHUCK HAGEL
HAS ORDERED THE CREATION OF AN
EMERGENCY RESPONSE TEAM IN CASE
ADDITIONAL EBOLA CASES ARE
DISCOVERED IN THE UNITED STATES.
A PENTAGON SPOKESMAN SAID THE
TEAM OF FIVE INFECTIOUS DISEASE
DOCTORS, 20 CRITICAL CARE NURSES
AND FIVE EXPERTS ON INFECTIOUS-
DISEASE PROTOCOLS WOULD WORK
ALONGSIDE CIVILIAN HEALTH CARE
WORKERS.
THE TEAM WILL BE TRAINED BY ARMY
INFECTIOUS DISEASE EXPERTS
STARTING NEXT WEEK.
ON THE SUNDAY TALK SHOWS TODAY,
THE NATION'S TOP INFECTIOUS
DISEASE DOCTOR ACKNOWLEDGED THAT
MANY SMALLER HOSPITALS AROUND
THE NATION ARE NOT FULLY
EQUIPPED TO DEAL WITH ANY EBOLA
OUTBREAK.
>> I THINK WE DON'T WANT TO GET
PEOPLE TO THINK THAT ANY
HOSPITAL, COMMUNITY HOSPITAL IS
TOTALLY EQUIPPED TO CARE FOR THE
PATIENT.
THEY MUST BE ABLE TO IDENTIFY
AND ISOLATE AND THEN FROM THERE
GET THEM TO A PLACE WHERE YOU
HAVE PRE-TRAINED PEOPLE WHO KNOW
HOW TO DO IT.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'LL HAVE MORE
ON EBOLA RIGHT AFTER THE NEWS
SUMMARY.
TURNING OVERSEAS NOW, AMERICAN
WARPLANES STRUCK ISIS TARGETS IN
SYRIA AND IRAQ NEARLY TWO DOZEN
TIMES THIS WEEKEND, ACCORDING TO
CENTRAL COMMAND.
HEAVY FIGHTING IS STILL GOING ON
IN KOBANI, THE CITY IN NORTHERN
SYRIA BY THE TURKISH BORDER.
TODAY, THE MILITANTS FIRED MORE
THAN 40 MORTAR SHELLS INTO THE
CITY AND DETONATED TWO CAR BOMBS
IN THE CITY CENTER.
SOME OF THE SHELLS REPORTEDLY
FELL INSIDE TURKEY.
EVEN SO, TURKISH PRESIDENT
ERDOGAN SAID TODAY HIS COUNTRY
IS OPPOSED TO THE UNITED STATES
SENDING ARMS TO THE KURDISH
FIGHTERS BATTLING ISIS IN
KOBANI.
KURDS IN TURKEY HAVE BEEN
BATTLING FOR SELF-RULE THE PAST
SEVERAL DECADES AND THE TURKISH
PRESIDENT SAID TODAY HE
CONSIDERS THEM TERRORISTS.
AT THE VATICAN, IN A SERMON
DELIVERED TO AN ESTIMATED 70,000
WORSHIPPERS, POPE FRANCIS SAID
TODAY THE CHURCH SHOULD NOT BE
AFRAID OF CHANGE.
THIS A DAY AFTER BISHOPS FROM
AROUND THE WORLD VOTED DOWN A
PROPOSAL TO MAKE THE CHURCH MORE
ACCEPTING OF GAYS.
INSTEAD, THE BISHOPS REITERATED
THAT MARRIAGE IS ONLY BETWEEN
MEN AND WOMEN.
THE PROPOSAL TO LIBERALIZE
CHURCH DOCTRINE AND SUPPORTED BY
THE POPE ACTUALLY WAS APPROVED
BY A MAJORITY OF THE BISHOPS,
BUT IT REQUIRED TWO-THIRDS
SUPPORT TO BE APPROVED.
TURNING TO ASIA NOW.
THERE'S BEEN MORE UNREST IN HONG
KONG THIS WEEKEND.
NEARLY 70 PEOPLE WERE INJURED
AND MORE THAN 30 PROTESTERS
ARRESTED FOLLOWING CLASHES
BETWEEN PRO-DEMOCRACY
DEMONSTRATORS AND POLICE.
THE CLASHES BEGAN FRIDAY AND
CONTINUED ALL WEEKEND.
NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN THE
GOVERNMENT AND STUDENT LEADERS
ARE SCHEDULED TO BEGIN TUESDAY.
THE PROTESTS HAVE BEEN GOING FOR
THREE WEEKS NOW.
IN BEIJING TODAY, DESPITE THICK
SMOG, TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
COMPETITORS, MANY WEARING MASKS,
COMPETED IN A MARATHON.
ACCORDING TO THE U.S. EMBASSY,
THE PARTICULATE MATTER IN THE
AIR WAS UP TO 16 TIMES THE LEVEL
CONSIDERED SAFE BY THE WORLD
HEALTH ORGANIZATION.
THE ORGANIZING COMMITTEE
PROVIDED MORE THAN 100,000
SPONGES AT STATIONS ALONG THE
ROUTE SO RUNNER COULD CLEAN
THEMSELVES OFF.
ELSEWHERE IN ASIA TODAY, TROOPS
FROM NORTH AND SOUTH KOREA
TRADED GUNFIRE FOR THE SECOND
TIME IN THE PAST SEVERAL DAYS.
THIS COMES AFTER HIGH-LEVEL
OFFICIALS FROM THE TWO COUNTRIES
MET EARLIER THIS MONTH AND
AGREED THEN TO HOLD ANOTHER
ROUND OF TALKS SOON.
PRESIDENT PETRO POROSHENKO OF
UKRAINE SAID TODAY RUSSIA HAS
AGREED TO SUPPLY UKRAINE WITH
NATURAL GAS THROUGHOUT THE
COMING WINTER.
HE SAID THE DEAL WAS STRUCK
DURING A MEETING HE HAD FRIDAY
WITH RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR
PUTIN.
DURING THE SAME MEETING, THE TWO
SIDES ALSO REPORTEDLY MADE
PROGRESS ON A MORE PERMANENT
PEACE DEAL BETWEEN THE UKRAINIAN
GOVERNMENT AND PRO-RUSSIAN
REBELS.
SKIRMISHES HAVE CONTINUED FOR
SEVERAL WEEKS, EVEN THOUGH A
CEASEFIRE HAS BEEN IN PLACE.
DESPITE FEARS THAT IT MIGHT
ENCOURAGE HIGH-RISK SEXUAL
BEHAVIOR, THE LARGEST GAY RIGHTS
ORGANIZATION IN THE UNITED
STATES IS CALLING ON INSURERS TO
PROVIDE MORE GENEROUS COVERAGE
OF A PILL THAT CAN REDUCE THE
RISK OF HIV TRANSMISSION BY 90
PERCENT OR MORE.
THE GROUP, KNOWN AS THE HUMAN
RIGHTS CAMPAIGN, CALLS THE PILL
TRUVADA "A CRITICALLY IMPORTANT
TOOL" IN FIGHTING HIV, THE VIRUS
THAT CAUSES AIDS.
THE GROUP IS ALSO URGING
MANUFACTURERS TO CUT THE PRICE
OF THE DRUG, THAT RANGES FROM
8,000 TO 14,000 A YEAR.
FOR MORE ABOUT WEST AFRICA'S
FIGHT AGAINST EBOLA, WE ARE
JOINED NOW FROM WASHINGTON VIA
SKYPE BY HELENE COOPER OF THE
NEW YORK TIMES.
SHE RECENTLY RETURNED FROM
LIBERIA.
I UNDERSTAND YOU WERE OUT AND
ABOUT WHEN YOU FIRST GOT HOME.
IN FACT, YOU WERE ONMEET THE
PRESSLAST SUNDAY.
I UNDERSTAND YOU ARE ON SOME
SORT OF SELF-IMPOSED QUARANTINE
NOW.
>> IT IS SORT OF A MODIFIED
QUARANTINE AS WELL, I CAME BACK
FROM LIBERIA ON SATURDAY AND I
WENT ON MEET THE PRESS.
I AM NOT SYMPTOMATIC, I HAVE
BEEN TAKING MY TEMPERATURE AND
ALL OF THAT BUT THEN I STARTED
THINKING ABOUT IT WHEN IT IS
TIME TO GO BACK TO THE OFFICE
AND GO TO THE PENTAGON WHICH IS
WHERE I ACTUALLY WORK OFTEN AND
I REALIZED THAT A LOT OF PEOPLE
WERE GOING TO FEEL WEIRD AROUND
ME, SO I WORKED IT OUT WITH THE
TIMES THAT I WOULD WORK FROM
HOME, I WOULDN'T GO INTO THE
PENTAGON AND INTO THE PRESS
BULLPEN WHICH IS A CROWDED AREA
AND WHAT I I AM TRYING TO DO IS
JUST FOR THE REST -- UNTIL I
REACH THE 21 DAY POINT IS TO
STAY AWAY FROM CROWDS, I AM NOT
TOUCHING ANYBODY, I AM BASICALLY
BEHAVING THE SAME WAY I DID
WHILE I WAS IN LIBERIA, WHICH IS
DON'T TOUCH ANYBODY, NO HUGGING,
NO KISSING NONE OF THAT AND
DON'T ALLOW ANYBODY TO TOUCH ME.
IF I DO GET SICK BY SOME CHANCE
AND PEOPLE ARE, HAVE CONTACT, I
WOULD LICK TO BE OH WOW SHE
DIDN'T TOUCH ANYBODY FOR 21 DAYS
SO YOU ARE NOT HAVING TO PUT
OTHER PEOPLE UNDER OBSERVATION
BECAUSE OF ME.
>> THIS IS ADVICE FROM DOCTORS
YOU GOT WHEN YOU CAME BACK OR
THIS IS --
>> NO, THIS IS NOT ADVICE.
THIS IS MUCH MORE, I THINK WE
ARE ALL TRYING TO FEEL OUR WAY
AROUND THIS AND STRIKE A BALANCE
BETWEEN CAUTION AND PANIC.
I AM TAKING MY TEMPERATURE, I
HAVE NEVER BEEN MORE INTIMATE,
THE WAY MY TEMPERATURE IS IN MY
LIFE AND I TEND TO STAY BETWEEN
97.6 AND 98.4, EVEN THOUGH I DID
ONCE GO UP TO 98.5 AND STREAK
OUT.
>> THE KRIENS IS THAT I AM NOT
SICK BECAUSE I DIDN'T TOUCH
ANYBODY WHILE I WAS IN LIBERIA
AND YOU DON'T GET EBOLA UNLESS
YOU COME INTO CONTACT WITH THE
BODILY FLUIDS OF A SYMPTOMATIC
EBOLA PATIENT BUT I UNDERSTAND A
LOT OF PEOPLE FEEL UNCOMFORTABLE
AT THE IDEA OF BEING ANYBODY
NEAR SOMEBODY WHO HAS BEEN TO
HIGH BEREA SO IN A WAY THIS IS
MUCH MORE PSYCHOLOGICAL BUT I
ALSO THINK THERE IS SOME THINGS
THAT WE MAYBE PERHAPS DON'T
UNDERSTAND ABOUT THE DISEASE SO
I AM JUST TRYING TO BE AS
CAUTIOUS AS POSSIBLE AND TO SORT
OF TREAT EVERYBODY I COME --
EVERYBODY I SEE THE SAME WAY I
WOULD TREAT MY FOUR-YEAR-OLD
NEPHEW, WHO I DEFINITELY AM NOT
TOUCHING FOR 21 DAYS.
SO MY SORT OF THE WAY I AM
LOOKING AT IT IS, OF IF I AM NOT
GOING TO TOUCH COOPER FOR 21
DAYS FOR 21 DAYS I WON'T TOUCH
ANYBODY FOR 21 DAYS.
>> PAINT A PICTURE WHAT IT WAS
LIKE ON THE STREETS OF LIBERIA,
A TOTALLY DIFFERENT HEALTHCARE
INFRASTRUCTURE AND SOME OF THE
IMAGES WE HAVE SEEN COMING FROM
THE COUNTRY HAVE BEEN SO GRAPHIC
IN HOW PEOPLE ARE LITERALLY
LYING ON THE GROUND OUTSIDE OF
HOSPITALS WAITING FOR CARE.
>> I DIDN'T SEE PEOPLE LYING ON
THE GROUND OUTSIDE HOSPITALS
BECAUSE I THINK THAT THE
REPORTING ON THAT IS MAYBE A
COUPLE OF WEEKS OLD, BUT WHAT
YOU DO SEE ON THE STREET IN HIGH
BEREA RIGHT NOW IS PEOPLE .. NOT
TOUCHING, YOU DON'T SEE PEOPLE
HOLDING HANDS, YOU DON'T SEE
PEOPLE HUGGING AND KISSING AND
THAT SORT OF THING.
THE DAILY LIFE OF THE LIBERIAN
HAS IN MANY WAYS ALMOST COME TO
A SCREECHING HALT.
THE GOVERNMENT OF LIBERIA HAS
CLOSED ALL NONESSENTIAL SERVICES
AND SCHOOLS ARE NOT OPEN, SO YOU
HAVE, IF YOU ARE LOOKING AT THE
ORDINARY LIBERIAN WHO DOES NOT
HAVE EBOLA, THEY ARE DEALING
WITH, YOU KNOW, TRANSPORTATION
IS A LOT HARDER, THEY ARE NOT
GOING INTO THE OFFICE AND ONE OF
THE THINGS THAT REALLY STRUCK ME
AS SO MANY PEOPLE WITH SCHOOL
AGE CHILDREN ARE MOCK ARE,
LOCKING THE KIDS UP IN THE HOUSE
AND SO YOU DO HAVE A CASE FOR
INSTANCE MY SISTER WHO IS A
NINE-YEAR-OLD DAUGHTER, MY
THAT'S THAT'S HAS BEEN LOCKED IN
THE HOUSE FOR TWO MONTHS SO IT
IS REALLY DIFFICULT FOR HER AND
FOR THOSE SORTS OF PEOPLE BUT
THEN YOU HAVE THE OTHER SIDE OF
THE EQUATION, THESE ARE THE
PEOPLE COMING IN CONTACT WITH
EBOLA AND THERE YOU SEE
SUFFERING OF THE MAGNITUDE THAT
WAS VERY HARD FOR ME TO SORT OF
GET ANY HEAD AROUND BECAUSE ONE
OF THE WORST THINGS ABOUT THIS
DISEASE IS IT MAKES PARIAHS OUT
OF THE PEOPLE WHO GET IT SO IF
YOU GET EBOLA, PEOPLE AROUND YOU
ARE NOT GOING TO WANT TO TOUCH
YOU, THEY ARE NOT GOING TO -- IT
HAS BECOME YOU IMMEDIATELY
BECOME, YOU ARE SICK, YOU ARE
VOMITING AND HAVE DIARRHEA AND
AT THE SAME TIME YOU ARE SORT OF
-- YOU ARE A MENACE TO ANYBODY
ELSE AROUND YOU AN THAT'S ONE OF
THE THINGS THAT REALLY STRUCK ME
ABOUT IT AND YET IN THE MIDDLE
OF ALL OF THAT YOU STILL HAVE
PEOPLE TRYING TO TAKE CARE OF
THESE PEOPLE WHO ARE SICK.
AT GREAT PERIL TO THEMSELVES,
PEOPLE NOW TO PUT ON GLOVES AND
MASKS AND THAT SORT OF THING,
BUT THIS IS A POOR COUNTRY WHERE
EVERYBODY DOESN'T HAVE ACCESS TO
THAT, SO IT IS REALLY
HEARTBREAKING, IT IS ONE OF THE
HARDEST REPORTING EXPERIENCES I
HAVE EVER HAD.
>> IS THE U.S. INTERVENTION WE
HAD PLANNED ON DEPLOYING
THOUSAND OF MARINES MARINES IN
THE AREA, IS THAT MAKING A
DIFFERENCE?
>> NOT YET BUT IT IS STARTING
TO.
I WENT IN, WHEN I FIRST ARRIVED
I CAME IN WITH THE U.S. MILITARY
AND I SPENT A LOT OF TIME WITH
THEM AND THEY ARE BUILDING,
WORKING TOWARD BUILDING 17
TREATMENT UNITS BUT IT IS
DEFINITELY SEEMS LIKE THEY WERE
IN A RACE AGAINST TIME AND THEY
ARE TRYING TO CATCH UP WITH THE
DISEASE THAT IS GALLOPING AHEAD
OF THEM.
SO THE CONSTRUCTION HAS STARTED
WHILE I WAS THERE ON SEVERAL OF
THESE CENTERS, THESE MILITARY
GUYS ARE IN THERE AND THEY ARE
DOING THEIR BEST AND THEY ARE
GOING AS FAR AS -- AS FAST AS
THEY CAN BUT THERE IS SOME
FRUSTRATION BECAUSE THIS SORT OF
THING TAKES TIME.
IT IS NOT AS EASY OR AS FAST AS
A LOT OF PEOPLE WOULD LIKE.
I THINK NOW WE ARE SEEING THE
POINT NOW THEY HAVE STOOD UP ONE
OF THE HOSPITALS AND THEY ARE
WORKING ON SEVERAL OTHER THAT
HAVE STARTED AND I THINK YOU ARE
NOW SEEING THE POINT WHERE THAT
YOU ARE STARTING TO SEE BENEFIT
ON THE GROUND.
ONE THING THAT REALLY, IT REALLY
DID DO, I THINK, IS THE ARRIVAL
OF THE AMERICAN MILITARY GAVE A
LOT OF LIBERIANS HOPE, YOU KNOW,
SORT OF LIKE HOPE THAT MAYBE
OTHER PEOPLE ARE COMING IN TO
HELP THEM.
THEY ARE NOT ON THEIR OWN.
THEY HAVE A LOT OF OPTIMISM WHEN
THE AMERICAN MILITARY SHOWED UP.
>> YES, AT THE SAME TIME WE HAVE
LIBERIAN PRESIDENT SAYING ON THE
BBC NEWSHOUR, SORT OF WROTE A
LETTER TO THE WORLD, QUOTE IT IS
THE DUTY OF ALL OF US AS GLOBAL
CITIZENS TO SEND A MESSAGE WE
WILL NOT LEAVE MILLIONS OF WEST
AFRICANS TO DEFEND FOR
THEMSELVES AGAINST AN ENEMY WHOM
THEY DO NOT KNOW AND HAVE NO
DEFENSE.
>> IT IS JUST -- IT IS TRAGIC
THAT WE HAVE LITERALLY GOT A
PRESIDENT NOW THAT IS JUST
PLEADING FOR HELP AROUND FOR THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY TO GET
IN THERE.
>> IT IS.
THE WHOLE RESPONSE HAS BEEN A
LOT SLOWER THAN THE DISEASE, AND
THAT IS THE BIGGEST PROBLEM.
I MEAN, I KEPT ASKING PEOPLE,
WHY HAVE THEY TAKEN TO THE END
OF SEPTEMBER FOR US TO START
FOR THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
TO GET?
AND YOU KNOW, THERE IS NOT
REALLY A REAL ANSWER TO THAT.
EVERYBODY THOUGHT, IT SEEMS AS
IF THE CDC, WHO, ALL OF THESE
DIFFERENT ENTITIES THOUGHT THIS
WAS GOING TO GO AWAY.
IN MARCH WHEN THIS FIRST ENTERED
LIBERIA, YOU KNOW, THERE WAS A
BRIEF MOMENT AND THEN THINGS
SEEMED TO GET UNDER CONTROL AND
THEN IT SHOWED UP AGAIN IN JUNE.
AND SO IT TOOK A LONG TIME, A
COUPLE OF PEOPLE EVEN SAID WELL
A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE ON VACATION,
IT DIDN'T TAKE, YOU KNOW, PEOPLE
DIDN'T REALIZE HOW BIG OF A DEAL
THIS WAS GOING TO BE AND THAT IS
SORT OF THE FACT OF WHERE WE ARE
RIGHT NOW.
>> CONSIDERING YOU WERE ON THE
STREETS IN LIBERIA WHERE EBOLA
IS FAR MORE RAMPANT, COMPARED TO
THE UNITED STATES, NOW THAT YOU
ARE BACK, AND THE REACTION TO
EBOLA THAT YOU MUST HAVE SEEN ON
CABLE NEWS AND ELSEWHERE,
COMPARE THE TWO FOR US.
>> WELL, THAT IS A REALLY GOOD
QUESTION.
I HAVE TO SAY PEOPLE ARE LIKE A
LOT MORE CALM THAN THEY ARE
HERE.
THEY SEEM -- THERE IS A
RESIGNATION IN LIBERIA TO THIS
-- THE FACT THEY ARE DEALING
WITH THIS, AND LIBERIANS SEEM
TO KNOW A LOT MORE ABOUT HOW IT
IS SPREAD AND THAT IS NATURAL HE
BECAUSE THEY HAVE BEEN DEALING
WITH IT SINCE MARCH.
SO PEOPLE IN LIBERIA, THE
AVERAGE PERSON ON THE STREET,
YOU KNOW, IS NOT TOUCHING
ANYBODY BUT THEY ALSO SEEM TO
KNOW YOU ARE NOT GOING TO CATCH
EBOLA FROM SOMEBODY TOUCHING
YOU, YOU ARE GOING TO CATCH
EBOLA FROM A SIMILAR TICK.
SYMPTOMATIC THAT IS KEY,
SYMPTOMATIC EBOLA PATIENT SO YOU
ARE NOT SEEING THE PANIC ON THE
STREETS IN LIBERIA, NOT
NECESSARILY ON STREETS HERE BUT
YOU SEE WHEN YOU TURN ON CABLE
NEWS AND YOU SEE, YOU HEAR ABOUT
ALL OF THESE DIFFERENT INSTANCES
OF PEOPLE THEIR CHILDREN FROM
SCHOOL AND THAT SORT OF THING
HERE AND I THINK THEIR TOLERANCE
FOR RISK IS PROBABLY A LOT
HIGHER THAN WE ARE HERE, THAT
OUR TOLERANCE FOR RISK HERE IN
THE UNITED STATES.
>> ALL RIGHT, HELENE COOPER OF
"THE NEW YORK TIMES" JOINING US
UNDER HOUSE QUARANTINE, SO TO
SPEAK IN WASHINGTON, D.C. VIA
HER PHONE.
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE PIECE.
LESS THAN A YEAR AGO, AFTER THE
WEBSITE WHERE AMERICANS COULD
SIGN UP FOR HEALTH INSURANCE
UNDER THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
WAS FINALLY FIXED, THERE WERE
ALMOST DAILY REPORTS ABOUT HOW
MANY PEOPLE WERE ENROLLING.
THE IMPRESSION THAT MAY HAVE
BEEN LEFT WAS THAT GETTING
INSURANCE WOULD LEAD TO GETTING
CARE.
BUT A RECENT REPORT BY THE
INSPECTOR GENERAL AT THE
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES SAYS ACCESS TO MEDICAL
CARE VARIES WIDELY FROM STATE TO
STATE.
AS A RESULT, IT SAYS, MEDICAID
PATIENTS STILL OFTEN WAIT MONTHS
OR TRAVEL LONG DISTANCES TO SEE
A DOCTOR.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE
TRAVELED TO CHICAGO RECENTLY,
WHERE HE MET A WOMAN SUFFERING
FROM MENTAL ILLNESS WHO HAS
STRUGGLED TO GET CARE HER ENTIRE
LIFE AND STILL DID EVEN AFTER
SHE WAS INSURED.
>> Reporter: GAIL DAVIS IS 52
YEARS OLD AND LIVES ON CHICAGO'S
SOUTH SIDE.
EVERY DAY SHE PREPARES LUNCH FOR
HER 82 YEAR OLD MOTHER WHO
SUFFERED A STROKE.
GAIL IS HER MOM'S PRIMARY
CAREGIVER, YET GAIL HERSELF HAS
STRUGGLED FOR DECADES WITH
MENTAL ILLNESS.
>> I WAS LIKE THAT I GUESS
BEFORE WHEN I COME INTO THE
WORLD I GUESS.
I DIDN'T MATCH UP, AND I DIDN'T
SEEM TO BLEND IN WITH SOCIETY,
WHAT SOCIETY SAYS WHAT THE WORLD
SAYS THIS IS WHAT YOU HAVE TO BE
AND DO.
>> Reporter: FOR YEARS, ANGER,
DEPRESSION, AND ANXIETY ALL KEPT
GAIL FROM HOLDING A JOB.
AND SHE DIDN'T HAVE HEALTH
INSURANCE.
THAT MEANT THAT FOR MUCH OF HER
LIFE, EXCEPT A FEW EMERGENCY
ROOM VISITS, GAIL'S MENTAL
CONDITIONS WENT UNTREATED.
>> PEOPLE WITH SERIOUS MENTAL
ILLNESSES GENERALLY DON'T SHOW
UP TO THE DOCTOR'S OFFICE.
THEY DON'T MAKE MEDICAL
APPOINTMENTS AND PSYCHIATRIC
APPOINTMENTS.
>> Reporter: THAT'S MARK ISHAUG-
- HE RUNS THRESHOLDS, CHICAGO'S
LARGEST NONPROFIT MENTAL HEALTH
PROVIDER.
HE SAYS GAIL'S STORY ISN'T
UNIQUE AMONG THE MILLIONS OF
LOW-INCOME, UNINSURED AMERICANS
WITH MENTAL ILLNESS.
>> SO PEOPLE WITH A SERIOUS OR
PERSISTENT MENTAL ILLNESS IN
GENERAL HAVE BEEN TREATED VERY
BADLY BY THE HEALTH CARE SYSTEM.
EITHER THEY HAVEN'T HAD
INSURANCE AND SO THEY WEREN'T
ABLE TO GET CARE, OR THEY USED
EMERGENCY ROOMS IN HOSPITALS FOR
THEIR CARE.
AND IT'S REALLY HARD TO ENGAGE
PEOPLE AND CONVINCE THEM THAT
THEY CAN GET HELP AND THEY CAN
BE TREATED WELL.
>> Reporter: IN 2010, A FAMILY
MEMBER REFERRED GAIL TO A MENTAL
HEALTH CLINIC IN HER
NEIGHBORHOOD RUN AND PAID FOR BY
THE CITY OF CHICAGO.
IT WAS THE FIRST TIME IN HER
LIFE SHE'D SEEN A THERAPIST.
>> HE'S BEEN A GOOD FORCE.
HE COME INTO MY LIFE AT THE
RIGHT TIME BECAUSE THAT'S
PROBABLY WHAT I NEEDED ALL
ALONG.
>> Reporter: BUT DURING THE
RECESSION, ILLINOIS WAS UNDER
FINANCIAL STRAIN.
FROM 2009 TO 2012, THE STATE CUT
MENTAL HEALTH SPENDING BY
$187 MILLION DOLLARS, A PATTERN
THAT WAS HAPPENING NATIONWIDE.
DURING THE SAME PERIOD, STATES
SLASHED OVERALL MENTAL HEALTH
BUDGETS BY $1.6 BILLION.
AND THAT MEANT MENTAL HEALTH
CLINICS LIKE GAIL'S WERE
SUDDENLY ON THE CHOPPING BLOCK.
BY THE END OF 2012, CHICAGO HAD
CLOSED HALF OF ITS OUTPATIENT
MENTAL HEALTH CLINICS, INCLUDING
GAIL'S.
>> IT'S LIKE WE WAS DISMISSED.
AND THAT WAS THE HARDEST PART.
>> Reporter: BUT THE CHICAGO
CLINIC CLOSURES, ALONG WITH
SIMILAR MENTAL HEALTH FACILITY
CLOSURES AROUND THE COUNTRY,
WEREN'T JUST ABOUT BUDGET CUTS.
WHEN THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT, OR
OBAMACARE, WAS SIGNED IN 2010,
IT INCLUDED A PROVISION TO
EXPAND MEDICAID.
27 STATES, INCLUDING ILLINOIS,
HAVE OPTED IN TO THE PLAN, WHICH
MEANS THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT,
RATHER THAN STATES, WILL PAY FOR
TREATMENT OF NEWLY QUALIFIED
LOW-INCOME PEOPLE LIKE GAIL.
BECHARA CHOUCAIR HAS BEEN
CHICAGO'S PUBLIC HEALTH
COMMISSIONER FOR FIVE YEARS.
>> NOW ALL OF A SUDDEN THEY HAVE
MORE OPTIONS.
AND IF THEY CHOOSE TO TRANSITION
TO ANOTHER PROVIDER, WE SUPPORT
THEM THROUGH THAT TRANSITION.
>> Reporter: JUST HERE IN
ILLINOIS, 120,000 PEOPLE WITH
PERSISTENT MENTAL ILLNESSES ARE
EXPECTED TO ENROLL IN MEDICAID
WHO WEREN'T ELIGIBLE BEFORE THE
NEW RULES CAME INTO EFFECT.
BUT OF COURSE BEING ELIGIBLE FOR
INSURANCE DOESN'T NECESSARILY
MEAN YOU'RE GETTING THE COVERAGE
YOU NEED.
FOR GAIL, SIGNING UP FOR
MEDICAID COMPLICATED HER MENTAL
HEALTH CARE.
AFTER HER CLINIC CLOSED, HER
THERAPIST BEGAN VISITING HER AT
HOME.
BUT ACCORDING TO HER MEDICAL
RECORDS, GAIL'S THERAPIST IN
MID-2013 WAS FORCED TO INFORM
HER THAT MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
WOULD LIKELY HAVE TO WIND DOWN
AND THAT SHE COULD ONLY CONTINUE
SERVICES IF SHE DIS-ENROLLED
FROM HER MEDICAID PLAN.
A CITY SPOKESPERSON SAYS THERE
WAS INITIALLY UNCERTAINTY OVER
WHETHER MEDICAID RECIPIENTS
COULD CONTINUE SEEING CITY
THERAPISTS, BUT THAT CLINICIANS
WERE NEVER TOLD SERVICES HAD TO
CEASE.
NEVERTHELESS, GAIL WENT A YEAR
WITHOUT SEEING A MENTAL HEALTH
PROFESSIONAL.
>> IF THIS IS SOMETHING THAT'S
WORKING AND THIS IS SOMEBODY
THAT I BUILD A BOND WITH, WHY
BREAK THAT UP?
YOU KNOW, BECAUSE I FELT LIKE
THAT WAS REALLY USELESS AND
SENSELESS.
>> Reporter: MARK HEYRMAN IS A
LAW PROFESSOR AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF CHICAGO AND ADVOCATES FOR
PEOPLE WITH MENTAL ILLNESS.
HE SAYS THEY HAVE A PARTICULARLY
DIFFICULT TIME WHEN THEY MOVE
OUT OF PUBLICLY FINANCED
FACILITIES AND MUST FIND NEW
PROVIDERS ON THEIR OWN USING
MEDICAID.
>> LOSING THAT HUMAN CONNECTION
AND A PLACE THAT THEY'VE GONE
FOR TREATMENT FOR QUITE A FEW
YEARS AND BEING TOLD, "NOW YOU
MUST GO FIND A NEW PERSON TO BE
CONNECTED TO."
THAT'S A DIFFICULT THING.
AND PEOPLE FALL THROUGH THE
CRACKS.
THEY FAIL TO SHOW UP.
>> Reporter: SO FAR, HEYRMAN
SAYS FIGURING OUT JUST HOW MANY
PEOPLE LIKE GAIL HAVE SLIPPED
THROUGH THE SYSTEM IS NEARLY
IMPOSSIBLE.
>> I THINK THE ANSWER IS WE
DON'T KNOW YET.
AND UNFORTUNATELY NO ONE HAS THE
MONEY OR THE TIME OR WANTS TO
INVEST THEIR MONEY AND TIME IN
SORT OF REALLY FIGURING OUT WHAT
IS HAPPENING TO EVERYONE WHO HAS
A SERIOUS MENTAL ILLNESS.
>> IT'S GONNA BE A WILD RIDE I
THINK OVER THE NEXT SEVERAL
YEARS.
>> Reporter: HAROLD POLLACK IS A
PUBLIC HEALTH RESEARCHER, ALSO
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO.
HE'S AN EXPERT ON THE NATIONAL
HEALTH CARE REFORM LAW AND A
SUPPORTER OF IT.
HE SAYS GAIL'S DIFFICULTIES SHOW
HOW IMPORTANT IT IS TO HELP
VULNERABLE PEOPLE NAVIGATE THE
SYSTEM.
>> BECAUSE IT'S NOT ENOUGH TO
JUST INSURE PEOPLE.
WE ACTUALLY HAVE TO HAVE
SYSTEMS IN PLACE THAT ARE
EFFECTIVE AND ECONOMICAL AND
CREDIBLE.
>> Reporter: IS MEDICAID AND THE
PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE
EXPANSION ENOUGH TO GET PEOPLE
IN CHICAGO WHO HAVE PERSISTENT
MENTAL ILLNESS THE CARE THAT
THEY NEED?
>> MEDICAID AND PRIVATE
INSURANCE, THEY'RE... THAT'S
JUST WHAT IT IS.
IT'S INSURANCE.
IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT IT'S CARE
AND IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT IT'S
ACCESS TO CARE.
BUT IT'S A NECESSARY
PRECONDITION TO WHAT WE'RE ABLE
TO DO.
>> Reporter: NOT EVERYONE AGREES
THOUGH THAT MEDICAID EXPANSION
IS THE NECESSARY FIRST STEP.
TWENTY STATES HAVE DECIDED NOT
TO EXPAND THEIR MEDICAID
PROGRAMS MOSTLY OUT OF COST
CONCERNS.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS
AGREED TO PAY 100% OF EXPANSION
COSTS, BUT THAT FIGURE STEADILY
DECLINES TO 90% BY 2020.
SO FAR, THE A.C.A. HAS SURVIVED
COURT CHALLENGES AND REPEAL
EFFORTS, AND ANALYST HAROLD
POLLACK SAYS THE EMERGING
CONSENSUS AMONG STATES MAY BE
MORE ABOUT FIXING IMPLEMENTATION
PROBLEMS THAN ELIMINATING THE
LAW ALTOGETHER.
>> I DO THINK THAT GOVERNORS,
BOTH DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS
ARE... YOU KNOW, THEY DO RAISE A
NUMBER OF VERY VALID POINTS WITH
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION THAT
SAY, "YOU KNOW, HEALTH REFORM
HAS TO BE TWEAKED SO THAT IT
ACTUALLY WORKS WELL."
AND AS WE START TO REALLY
IMPLEMENT THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT, WE WILL DISCOVER VARIOUS
THINGS THAT HAVE TO BE FIXED
ALONG THE WAY.
>> Reporter: PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
SAID HE WELCOME IDEAS TO MODIFY
HEALTH CARE REFORM AS PROBLEMS
ARISE.
>> I WILL ALWAYS WORK WITH
ANYONE WHO IS WILLING TO MAKE
THIS LAW WORK EVEN BETTER.
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE, BACK ON
THE SOUTH SIDE OF CHICAGO, GAIL
DAVIS IS SEEING HER CITY-FUNDED
THERAPIST AGAIN.
ARE YOU GETTING THE HELP AND THE
ASSISTANCE THAT YOU NEED TO KEEP
YOURSELF HEALTHY?
>> NOT LIKE IT SHOULD BE, YOU
KNOW.
BUT THAT AS I SPEAK WILL CHANGE
BECAUSE I DO HAVE AN APPOINTMENT
BY THE WAY NEXT FRIDAY.
>> Reporter: THOUGH THE CITY
MENTAL HEALTH CLINICS AREN'T
TAKING GAIL'S MEDICAID PLAN,
THEY ARE KEEPING PATIENTS LIKE
HER ON BOARD AT LEAST FOR NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: TO LEARN MORE
ABOUT THE PEOPLE BEING SERVED BY
CHICAGO'S LARGEST NON-PROFIT
MENTAL HEALTH CARE PROVIDER,
VISIT newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: BRITAIN IS
TAKING STEPS TO CRACK DOWN ON
INTERNET TROLLS-- THOSE WHO
INTENTIONALLY POST INFLAMMATORY
AND EVEN THREATENING COMMENTS
ONLINE.
VICTORIA McDONALD OF ITV HAS OUR
REPORT.
>> THE MOST RECENT OF MANY HIGH
PROFILE TROLL ATTACKS ON CELEBS,
LAST WEEK SHE RECEIVED ONLINE
THREATS AFTER SHE DEFENDED HER
MOTHER AGAINST COMMENTS ABOUT
THE CONVICTED RAPIST CHAD EVANS.
NOW THE GOVERNMENT HAS ANNOUNCE
ADD CRACKDOWN THAT IS EVEN BEING
CALLED IN THE TABLOID PRESS,
CLOY'S LAW.
>> SIX MONTHS IS THE MOST
ANYBODY CAN BE SENT TO PRISON AT
THE MOMENT FOR THIS TYPE OF
CRIME, THE GOVERNMENT WANTS TO
CHANGE THAT TO TWO YEARS, AND
THEY WANT THE POLICE TO BE GIVEN
THREE YEARS TO INVESTIGATE.
>> THERE ARE NO FIGURES FOR HOW
MANY PEOPLE HAVE BEEN TROLLED
THAT IS ABUSED ONLINE, BUT
CELEBS AND POLITICIANS DO FIND
THEMSELVES TARGETED.
STELLA CREASE SITUATE RECEIVED
VIAL ABUSE ON TWITTER AFTER
SUPPORTING A CAMPAIGN TO PUT
JANE AUSTEN ON THE TEN-POUND
NOTE.
>> THAT PARTICULAR TROLL WAS
LATER JAILED FOR 18 WEEKS.
>> THE GOVERNMENT DESCRIBES THIS
AS A STAND AGAINST CYBER MOB YET
THERE ARE THOSE WHO BELIEVE DOES
NOT BRING THE LAW UP TO DATE.
>> WE STILL HAVE A PROBLEM THAT
THESE LAWS WERE WRITTEN BEFORE
THE INTERNET AND THEY WERE
WRITTEN TO DEAL WITH
COMMUNICATIONS THAT WEREN'T
ONLINE SO THIS IS STILL IF YOU
REPORT SOMETHING, WHERE IS THE
COMPUTER THAT YOU RECEIVED THIS
THREAT ON BECAUSE THAT IS HOW WE
DECIDE THE JURISDICTION OF THIS
COMPLAINT, AND THAT IS A VERY
LOOKING AT A DIGITAL PROBLEM, I
THINK.
>> IT HAS RAISED ISSUE OF WHAT
IS ILLEGAL, WHAT PEOPLE CAN AND
CANNOT SAY ONLINE.
>> SHE PUT IT ANOTHER WAY.
THIS IS NOT FREEDOM OF SPEECH,
SHE SAID.
THIS IS ONLINE TERRORISM.
AND THEREFORE, RICHARD SAID TO
HER DAUGHTERS TROLL PROSECUTION
AWAITS YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
HEALTH OFFICIALS IN SPAIN SAY A
NURSING ASSISTANT WHO TREATED
TWO PATIENTS WITH EBOLA AND
LATER CONTRACTED IT HERSELF IS
NOW FREE OF THE DISEASE.
AND THE FIANCEE AND FAMILY OF
THOMAS DUNCAN THE PATIENT WHO
DIED IN DALLAS END THEIR 21 DAY
QUARANTINE TOMORROW.
FIANCEE RELEASED A STATEMENT
TODAY SAYING NONE OF THEM HAVE
SHOWN ANY SIGN OF ILLNESS.
I AM HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS
FOR WATCHING AND WE WILL SEE YOU
TOMORROW NIGHT.